a lump of granite some salt all right
not notes also antique glass bowl what
do you think
how about the smoke alarm
because suspicion is but don't know why
you think that one is brilliant okay
well thank you very much um interesting
so you've got some of those things right
some not and I can show you here I've
got so what's called the Geiger counter
this basically measures what's called
ionizing radiation high-energy radiation
okay first of all this basically isn't
radioactive lots of people think that
the luminous paint on the clock it makes
it radioactive and it used to be the
case like in the 1940s and 50s they use
something called radium to paint it with
but nowadays they don't use that so that
goes right down there and the Brazil
nuts this is a really interesting one
you sometimes hear it said that Brazil
nuts are radioactive and that's because
the tree has quite a big root Network
and it takes up minerals from the soil
and the ones from Brazil they are often
more radioactive because Brazil happens
to have a little bit more uranium than
normal in the ground but these aren't
from Brazil so they're not and I can
show you you can see that between one or
two per second but it's not the uranium
actually in this case it's because all
living things might you and me and
plants and everything contain potassium
and potassium naturally has a very small
amount of radioactivity okay so next
this salt here well this is low sodium
salt and they replace some of the sodium
with potassium in that low salt and so
this it's somewhere between five and ten
second yeah now how about the other
stuff well this bowl here this is made
out of uranium glass
these are cloths with uranium in it and
it's not very much very it's not got
much uranium in but what
so next up is the smoke detector inside
a smoke detector is a little pellet of
something called americium it's an
element and it's quite radioactive
between 200 and 500 counts per second
you're back but it's giving out a type
of radiation I'm think doesn't even go
through sheets of paper and that's why
you can have in your house it's fine
and last of all at the top of the table
the granite lots of people think that's
radioactive and you're right in fact
it's got uranium in five hundred counts
second or something you get lots of this
in the UK and Cornwall and places like
that
I've got another little treat for you
I'm down here I've got a tub of nuclear
waste where do you think the stuff
inside this would lie on this scale way
over there anything it's wavy yeah
actually it goes somewhere about here
it's slightly more radioactive than low
sodium salt I'll come clean actually
that this doesn't actually have
radioactive waste in I wasn't allowed to
bring it out
I've just got a photo of myself with the
real stuff for the hair and you can see
there's about ten counts per second
there's just a little bit more than the
salt and that's about typical for
low-level nuclear waste which is what
this is but you're right than if it was
high level of radioactive waste like
spent fuel rods from inside the reactor
then it'd be maybe over a million
million counts so like way over there
way off the scale
you